Digital Reading Write-up
---
1. Gregory of Nyssa was a 4th Century AD theologian, philosopher, rhetorician and Bishop.  He exceptionally broad ouevre contains works of oratory, theology, philosophy, biography and poetry.  Born to a wealthy family in Cappadocia, he, like his brother Basil, was educated in the finest rhetorical schools of the era.  As a result, he writes in a Classicizing literary style, which undoubtedly looked back to the ancient models for the genres in which he worked.  The models of his style, however, were more distant to him than Shakespeare is to an Englishman or American of the 21st century; the Greek he spoke would have developed substantially since the Classical period.  As a result, his work is bound to reflect significant stylistic differences from the Classical philosophers, biographers, and orators.

2.  In brief, this project aims to develop a better understanding of Gregory's distinctive writing style.  While reading a few of the Bishop's sermons on the Beatitudes, I observed that Gregory frequently encloses the main verb of a clause *within* a noun phrase, typically at the end of the clause.  As a result, the verb-noun pair is a common occurrence.  This particular linguistic phenomenon does not occur with any great frequency in Classical Greek.  It is possibly a unique feature of Gregory's style, or perhaps a common tendency in Patristic Greek.  Regardless, the pattern is worthy of investigation. The basic element of the pattern is the consecutive verb-noun pair.  Other elements -- articles, participles, adjectives -- may be far removed from this fundamental structure.  In fact, they might not even be present in the noun-phrase.  It is obvious, therefore, that a number of variations on this pattern can theoretically exist; I observed 3 such variations in only about 450 lines of Greek.  Thus the project seeks to address this scholarly question: how many different variations on the basic pattern appear in the Nyssenian corpus?


3.  The digital corpus was compiled from Migne's Patrologia Linguae Graecae, using an OCR Text produced by Bruce Robertson.  Cleaning up this corpus for analysis required preparing 675 raw  html files, consisting of text wrapped in a complex OCR structure.  The first step in preparing the text involved ripping out the OCR structure and producing a clean source text.  This demanded mapping the OCR structure elements (\"body"\"div"\"span"\"span") to the text in order to produce the text contents, and from there filtering out Latin and nonGreek unicode characters, in order to produce a relatively clean source text.  With this completed, the next step was to create a unique word list, using the "distinct" function on the entire set of files, and sorting alphabetically.  This completed, each unique word was sent to the Morpheus server and a parsed reply, listing part of speech, lemma, and identifier.   
  

4.  The Morpheus reply introduced a significant problem, one which substantially inhibited my ability to complete the project as I'd planned.  Morpheus returns each reply wrapped in a substantial superstructure.  It is necessary to first remove this structure and extract the text of the reply before proceeding with the final steps in preparing the text for analysis.  At this phase, for a period of several weeks, the process of cleaning up the text failed.  The repl returned an Error message, indicating that there were characters which failed to parse in the Morpheus replies.  We made a number of different attempts to prevent these characters from contaminating the data. These included breaking up two large scripts into four smaller ones, changing host environments, and changing editors (from Notepad to Atom) in order to prevent errors from being introduced by the text editor.  None of these attempts worked successfully, but they played a crucial role in diagnosing the problem. The wide variety of solutions we attempted to no success eventually indicated that the bad data must be introduced in the Morpheus replies themselves.  Once this fact had been established, all that remained was the time-consuming matter of picking through an individual file manually, identifying problems that caused the extraction to fail, and the modifying the script to eliminate them.
 
5.  With this major hurdle cleared, the final steps in preparing the text were simple.  The replies were easily extracted into a three-column file using the "ExtractMorpheus" script. The three-column file containing the Morpheus replies was then aligned with the plain text of the corpus, which was produced in the first step by extracting the text from the OCR structure.  The alignment of these two documents yielded a usable, citable text.  My question, which relies mostly on documenting the parts of speech of individual words, made it superfluous to align lemmata with source text.  Instead, I chose to create a "text" solely from the parts of speech listed in the individual Morpheus parses.  This set me up well for the next stage of the project, which requires the extraction both of every verb noun pair, and of each occurrence of the article in relation to the pair.
8.  [Blank]
6.  Methods 2: Sliding Function
10.  [Blank]
7.  Chiefly, the work of this semester has been ironing out a method to approach this question.  The bulk of the project lies in the future; however, the two major lines of analysis are clear. The first major lines of analysis is intracorporal.  As noted in the introduction, Gregory of Nyssa worked in a number of different disciplines, with a number of different literary forms: dialogue, treatise, biography, oration, poem.  Therefore, it would be feasible to subdivide the Nyssenian corpus by genre, grouping the biographies, dialogues, treatises, and sermons.  Once this has been accomplished, the method employed in this project could be used to analyze each of the different subcorpora, in order to determine if this linguistic pattern occurs more frequently in certain types of literary text.  This question would shed light on whether Gregory's style changes as the form changes, or if it is relatively constant.  Second, once an internal comparison of Gregory's works has been carried out, it would be worthwhile to conduct an external comparison.  As mentioned at the beginning, the Bishop wrote in a Classical style, drawing inspiration from Classical models: he wrote philosophical dialogues in imitation of the *Phaedo*, for instance.  The logically consecutive approach to the question would involve running the same kind of analysis on bodies of Classical Greek -- Plato's dialogues, Demosthenes' oration, Plutarch's lives -- in order to see if the same pattern appears, what kind of work it appears in, and how frequently it does so.  This approach would indicate whether the pattern is a Classical construction or a Patristic innovation.  If it proves to be a Classical construction, this type of analysis would indicate whether the pattern is derived form any particular genre, and whether or not Gregory uses it in a different context than his Classical predecessors.
12.  [Blank]